---
layout: post
title: Coming Soon
---
{% newthought 'Autonomous Vehicles and Bicycle Interactions'%}

With the Biden administration underway, legislators have recently made a renewed efforts to officially pass a bill to federally regulate autonomous vehicles (AVs). While AVs are generally lauded for their innovation and potential to revolutionize not only transportation, but also society at large (a belief I too am apt to support), I think it’s worth scrutinizing the necessity of such vehicles. 
Are they really what we need as a society? What exactly are they intended to improve? 
Bicycle and AV interactions are an excellent case study of this dilemma. 

Here's a preview:

*Since the world has had little experience with self-driving vehicles, the data to determine their exact qualifying statistics hasn’t been published or doesn’t exist yet, or at least doesn’t exist to the confidence levels needed to make any meaningful conclusions. Ample theoretical inquiry, however, can be found on the interaction of bikes with self-driving vehicles, especially from 2015-2017, when news broke of Elaine Herzberg’s death, in which an Uber owned self-driving vehicle ran her down while walking her bike across an Arizona street. It was presumed that the car recognized neither Herzberg nor the shape of her bag-laden bicycle, suggesting a lack of thorough vetting for AV’s bicycle identification. It should be noted however that a backup driver was also behind the wheel (watching The Voice) and the AEBs had been disabled, so the exact degree of the car’s (and by extension Uber’s) fault is indeterminate.*
*And as it turns out, the discontent between bicycles and automated vehicles on the roadway is not a novel concept. A [Slate article](https://slate.com/technology/2018/02/self-driving-cars-struggle-to-detect-cyclists-bicycle-to-vehicle-communications-arent-the-answer.html) cites UC Berkeley research Engineer Steven Shladover acknowledging: “Bicycles are probably the most difficult detection problem that autonomous vehicle systems face.” And it’s no wonder: they are small, swift, and unpredictable. Unlike cars, which have a blocky shape with lots of mass, bikes have a smaller inconsistent shape. Even when bicyclists follow safe legal procedures for switching lanes, the AI can have difficulties interpreting the shapes in its visual field; a bike gets bigger, in a 2D sense, when going from the back to the side views. When viewing the back of a bike, it looks small and compact. And without a holistic understanding of a bicycle, it would be hard to predict how far forward the bike extends. So, when viewing a bike from the side, it seems to get bigger and change shape, a seeming improvement for an automated vehicle’s sensing capabilities. However, even this, is easily misinterpreted as the side view has more negative space between the wheels and the frame. Not only that but putting an arm out to signal direction, wearing eye catching clothing, or attaching saddle bags and baskets can change the appearance of a bicycle.*